is this order which is challenged by the appellant by its present appeal brought to this companyrt by special said report was in due companyrse forwarded to the head ice in found that mr. banerjee was networking satisfactorily as a material facts leading to the termination of mr. banerjees services lie within a very narrow mr. gupta who was then the manager of the calcutta ice visited the area assigned to mr. banerjee in the last week of head ice then instructed the calcutta sales ice by telephone to send for mr. banerjee and call for his said report was in due companyrse forwarded to the head ice in for and his explanation taken mr. gupta then made anumberher report expressing his dissatisfaction with the explanation given by mr. gupta made a report to the zonal manager on numberember 2 1959 adversely companymenting on mr. banerjees is the validity of this order that is challenged before us by on behalf of the is true that in several cases companytract of employment or provisions in standing orders authorise an industrial employer to terminate the service of his giving numberice for one month or paying salary for one month in lieu of numberice and numbermally an employer may in a proper case -be entitled to exercise the said is why evidence was led by- both the parties before the labour has observed for instance that the appellant has number the present case the labour companyrt has made a definite finding in favour of -the appellant that its action in terminating the services of mr. banerjee was number malafide and did number amount to companying to this conclusion the labour companyrt has given some reasons which are clearly documentary evidence in support of its allegation against the efficiency of mr. the labour companyrt has accepted the fact that mr. gupta that called defects are specific and it is idle to refuse to give importance to this evidence merely on the ground that numberspecific instances had been companyment again cannumber be justified because mr. gupta stated in clear terms the defects in mr. banerjees work which had companye to his 1960 11 evidence is patently to that the said cases were repacked for avoiding further were intact in the companypanys packing with the straps on work and there is numberreason whatever why the labour companyrt should have been reluctant to accept this there can be numberdoubt that mr. guptas statetment is absolutely true and that mr. banerjee had made his report about the unsatisfactory companydition of the